---
title: Hidden Markov Models
layout: default
---

# Hidden Markov Models

It often the case that in real-world sequential data problems, the actual process or *states* cannot be observed directly. Rather, we have access to information generated by those states. Hidden Markov Models provide a framework to infer hidden states from observable sequences.

## 1. Theory

The following is a condensed and focused extract of the lecture notes [^1]. These concepts can be found in the many texbooks on the subject available online. 

We begin by introducing the standard notation for this problem. Let $V = \\{ 0,...,M-1 \\}$ be the set of possible observations. We denote an obesrvation by $\theta_i \in V$, with $i=0,...,T-1$, and $\theta = (\theta_0,...,\theta_{T-1})$ an observation sequence. Furthermore, let $Q = \\{ q_0,...,q_{N-1} \\}$ be the set of possible states and $X_i \in Q$, with $i=0,...,T-1$, denote a state value. FInally, let $\pi$ be the initial state distribution. 

By definition, a Markov process is fully determined by the current state and a transition matrix $A=\\{ a_{ij} \\}$ of size $N \times N$ where

$$
a_{ij} = P(\text{state } q_j \text{ at } t+1 | \text{state } q_i \text{ at } t), \qquad (1.0)
$$

with $A$ said to be row-stochastic, i.e.,

$$
a_{ij} \ge 0, \qquad \sum_{j=0}^{N-1} a_{ij} = 1.
$$

The relation between the state and the observations is encoded in the matrix $B=\\{ b_{jk} \\}=\\{ b_j(k) \\}$ of size $N \times M$ where

$$
b_{j}(k) = P(\text{observation } k \text{ at } t | \text{state } q_j \text{ at } t). \qquad (1.1)
$$

Analogously to A, we have that B is also row-stochastic. Given $N$ and $M$, an HMM model is thus defined by

$$
\lambda = (A,B,\pi). \qquad (1.2)
$$

A funadmanetal quantity of interest, that characterises the probelm, is the joint probability of the state sequence and observation sequence $P(\theta,X)$. To illustrate where the Markov property arises, consider the simple case of a sequence of length $3$. Recalling the basic property of joint and conditional distribution we have

$$
\begin{aligned}
P(x_0,x_1,x_2) &= P(x_0 | x_1,x_2 )P(x1,x_2) \\
& = P(x_0 | x_1,x_2 )P(x1|x_2) P(x_2).
\end{aligned}
$$

However, by the Markov property $P(x_0 | x_1,x_2 ) = P(x_0 | x_1)$. Thus, we have

$$
P(\theta,X) = \pi_{x_0} \Pi_{i=1}^{T-1} b_{x_{i-1}}(\theta_{i-1})a_{x_{i-1},x_{i}} \qquad (1.3)
$$

since $\theta_i$ is conditionally independent of the remaining variables given $x_i$. 

Three problems are of interest for applications. 

### Problem 1

Given the model $\lambda = (A,B,\pi)$ and a sequence of observations $\theta$, find $P(\theta ; \lambda)$. That is, we want to find the probability assigned to an obsevation sequence given the model $\lambda$. 

By summing over all possible sequences in (1.3), we obtain

$$
\begin{aligned}
P(\theta ;\lambda) &= \sum_X P(\theta , X ; \lambda) \\
&= \sum_X  \pi_{x_0} b_{x_0} (\theta_0) a_{x_0,x_1}b_{x_1}(\theta_1) \cdots a_{x_{T-2},x_{T-1}}b_{x_{T-1}}(\theta_{T-1}). \qquad(1.4)
\end{aligned}
$$

Computing (1.4) directly is expensive. The number of multiplications in each term of the sum are about $2T$. One has to sum over all possible combinations of $N$ state values in a sequence of length $T$, that is $N^T$ combinations. In total we have a complexity of $\sim TN^T$. Fortunately, there exists an efficient algorithms to compute $P(\theta ;\lambda)$ called the *forward* or $\alpha$*-pass* algorithm (see [^1] for details), by which the complexity of the algorithm is reduced to $\sim TN^2$. 

### Problem 2

Given the model $\lambda = (A,B,\pi)$ and a sequence of observations $\theta$, find and optimal state sequence for the underlying Markov process. Here, we aim to compute the hidden state sequence that underlies the observed process. 

Here, we have different interpretations of "optimal". In the HHM sense, we select the most probale state at each sequence location. Differently, the so-called dynamic programming selecs the state sequence having the maximum probability. In either case, the solution algorithm goes through a $\beta$*-pass* (see [^1] for details). As fotr the $\alpha$-pass, a conveninet manipulation of (1.4) allows to retain the favaurable complexity. 

### Problem 3

Given an observation sequence $\theta$ and dimensions $N$ and $M$, find the model $\lambda = (A,B,\pi)$ that maximizes the probability of $\theta$. 

This problem is often ecountered in practise. All one is given is a sequence of observations from real-world data. It is hoped that the problem fits well within the HMM framwork such that, after having learned $\lambda = (A,B,\pi)$ from data, one can uncover the underlying hidden state sequence. Through an algorithm that re-estimates the model iteratively, maximizaion of $P(\theta ; \lambda)$ is achieved. The interested reader is referred to [^1] for implementation details. 

## 2. COmputations

[^1]: Stamp, M., 2004. A revealing introduction to hidden Markov models. Department of Computer Science San Jose State University.
